Valentin Iglesias et al.. "Prediction of the effect of pH on the aggregation and conditional folding of intrinsically disordered proteins with SolupHred and DispHred.." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.08.447585. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.08.447585.
Proteins microenvironments modulate their structures. Binding partners, organic molecules, or dissolved ions can alter the protein's compaction, inducing aggregation or order-disorder conformational transitions. Surprisingly, bioinformatic platforms often disregard the protein context in their modeling. In recent work, we proposed that modeling how pH affects protein net charge and hydrophobicity might allow us to forecast pH-dependent aggregation and conditional disorder in intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). As these approaches showed remarkable success in recapitulating the available bibliographical data, we made these prediction methods available for the scientific community as two user-friendly web servers. SolupHred is the first dedicated software to predict pH-dependent aggregation, and DispHred is the first pH-dependent predictor of protein disorder. Here we dissect the features of these two software applications to train and assist scientists in studying pH-dependent conformational changes in IDPs.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Ludwig Mann et al.. "ECCsplorer: a pipeline to detect extrachromosomal circular DNA (eccDNA) from next-generation sequencing data." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.08.447410. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.08.447410.
Motivation: Extrachromosomal circular DNAs (eccDNAs) are ring-like DNA structures physically separated from the chromosomes with 100 bp to several megabasepairs in size. Apart from carrying tandemly repeated DNA, eccDNAs may also harbor extra copies of genes or recently activated transposable elements. As eccDNAs occur in all eukaryotes investigated so far and likely play roles in stress, cancer, and aging, they have been prime targets in recent research - with their investigation limited by the scarcity of computational tools. Results: Here, we present the ECCsplorer, a bioinformatics pipeline to detect eccDNAs in any kind of organism or tissue using next-generation sequencing techniques. Following Illumina-sequencing of amplified circular DNA (circSeq), the ECCsplorer enables an easy and automated discovery of eccDNA candidates. The data analysis encompasses two major procedures: First, read mapping to the reference genome allows the detection of informative read distributions including high coverage, discordant mapping, and split reads. Second, reference-free comparison of read clusters from amplified eccDNA against control sample data reveals specifically enriched DNA circles. Both software parts can be run separately or jointly, depending on the individual aim or data availability. To illustrate the wide applicability of our approach, we analyzed semi-artificial and published circSeq data from the model organisms H. sapiens and A. thaliana, and generated circSeq reads from the non-model crop B. vulgaris. We clearly identified eccDNA candidates from all datasets, with and without reference genomes. The ECCsplorer pipeline specifically detected mitochondrial mini-circles and retrotransposon activation, showcasing the ECCsplorer's sensitivity and specificity. The derived eccDNA targets are valuable for a wide range of downstream investigations - from analysis of cancer-related eccDNAs over organelle genomics to identification of active transposable elements. Availability and implementation: The ECCsplorer pipeline is available on GitHub at https://github.de/crimBubble/ECCsplorer under the GNU license.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Le Guillarme, Nicolas and Wilfried Thuiller. "TaxoNERD: deep neural models for the recognition of taxonomic entities in the ecological and evolutionary literature." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.08.444426. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.08.444426.
1. Given the biodiversity crisis, we more than ever need to access information on multiple taxa (e.g. distribution, traits, diet) in the scientific literature to understand, map and predict all-inclusive biodiversity. Tools are needed to automatically extract useful information from the ever-growing corpus of ecological texts and feed this information to open data repositories. A prerequisite is the ability to recognise mentions of taxa in text, a special case of named entity recognition (NER). In recent years, deep learning-based NER systems have become ubiqutous, yielding state-of-the-art results in the general and biomedical domains. However, no such tool is available to ecologists wishing to extract information from the biodiversity literature. 2. We propose a new tool called TaxoNERD that provides two deep neural network (DNN) models to recognise taxon mentions in ecological documents. To achieve high performance, DNN-based NER models usually need to be trained on a large corpus of manually annotated text. Creating such a gold standard corpus (GSC) is a laborious and costly process, with the result that GSCs in the ecological domain tend to be too small to learn an accurate DNN model from scratch. To address this issue, we leverage existing DNN models pretrained on large biomedical corpora using transfer learning. The performance of our models is evaluated on four GSCs and compared to the most popular taxonomic NER tools. 3. Our experiments suggest that existing taxonomic NER tools are not suited to the extraction of ecological information from text as they performed poorly on ecologically-oriented corpora, either because they do not take account of the variability of taxon naming practices, or because they do not generalise well to the ecological domain. Conversely, a domain-specific DNN-based tool like TaxoNERD outperformed the other approaches on an ecological information extraction task. 4. Efforts are needed in order to raise ecological information extraction to the same level of performance as its biomedical counterpart. One promising direction is to leverage the huge corpus of unlabelled ecological texts to learn a language representation model that could benefit downstream tasks. These efforts could be highly beneficial to ecologists on the long term.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Xiangyi Li et al.. "MCGA: a multi-strategy conditional gene-based association framework integrating with isoform-level expression profiles reveals new susceptible and druggable candidate genes of schizophrenia." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.08.447608. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.08.447608.
Linkage disequilibrium and disease-associated variants in non-coding regions make it difficult to distinguish truly associated genes from redundantly associated genes for complex diseases. In this study, we proposed a new conditional gene-based framework called MCGA that leveraged an improved effective chi-squared statistic to control the type I error rates and remove the redundant associations. MCGA initially integrated two conventional strategies to map genetic variants to genes, i.e., mapping a variant to its physically nearby gene and mapping a variant to a gene if the variant is a gene-level expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) of the gene. We further performed a simulation study and demonstrated that the isoform-level eQTL was more powerful than the gene-level eQTL in the association analysis. Then the third strategy, i.e., mapping a variant to a gene if the variant is an isoform-level eQTL of the gene, was also integrated with MCGA. We applied MCGA to predict the potential susceptibility genes of schizophrenia and found that the potential susceptibility genes identified by MCGA were enriched with many neuronal or synaptic signaling-related terms in the Gene Ontology knowledgebase and antipsychotics-gene interaction terms in the drug-gene interaction database (DGIdb). More importantly, nine susceptibility genes were the target genes of multiple approved antipsychotics in DrugBank. Comparing the susceptibility genes identified by the above three strategies implied that strategy based on isoform-level eQTL could be an important supplement for the other two strategies and help predict more candidate susceptibility isoforms and genes for complex diseases in a multi-tissue context.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Stefano Pascarella et al.. "SARS-CoV-2 B.1.617 Indian variants: are electrostatic potential changes responsible for a higher transmission rate?." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.08.445535. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.08.445535.
Lineage B.1.617+, also known as G/452R.V3, is a recently described SARS-CoV-2 variant under investigation (VUI) firstly identified in October 2020 in India. As of May 2021, three sublineages labelled as B.1.617.1, B.1.617.2 and B.1.617.3 have been already identified, and their potential impact on the current pandemic is being studied. This variant has 13 amino acid changes, three in its spike protein, which are currently of particular concern: E484Q, L452R and P681R. Here we report a major effect of the mutations characterizing this lineage, represented by a marked alteration of the surface electrostatic potential (EP) of the Receptor Binding Domain (RBD) of the spike protein. Enhanced RBD-EP is particularly noticeable in the B.1.617.2 sublineage, which shows multiple replacements of neutral or negatively-charged amino acids with positively-charged amino acids. We here hypothesize that this EP change can favor the interaction between the B.1.617+ RBD and the negatively-charged ACE2 thus conferring a potential increase in the virus transmission.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Bartoszewicz, Jakub M, Ulrich Genske and Bernhard Y Renard. "Deep learning-based real-time detection of novel pathogens during sequencing." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.01.26.428301. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.01.26.428301.
Novel pathogens evolve quickly and may emerge rapidly, causing dangerous outbreaks or even global pandemics. Next-generation sequencing is the state-of-the-art in open-view pathogen detection, and one of the few methods available at the earliest stages of an epidemic, even when the biological threat is unknown. Analyzing the samples as the sequencer is running can greatly reduce the turnaround time, but existing tools rely on close matches to lists of known pathogens and perform poorly on novel species. Machine learning approaches can predict if single reads originate from more distant, unknown pathogens, but require relatively long input sequences and processed data from a finished sequencing run. Incomplete sequences contain less information, leading to a trade-off between sequencing time and detection accuracy. Using a workflow for real-time pathogenic potential prediction, we investigate which subsequences already allow accurate inference. We train deep neural networks to classify Illumina and Nanopore reads and integrate the models with HiLive2, a real-time Illumina mapper. This approach outperforms alternatives based on machine learning and sequence alignment on simulated and real data, including SARS-CoV-2 sequencing runs. After just 50 Illumina cycles, we observe an 80-fold sensitivity increase compared to real-time mapping. The first 250bp of Nanopore reads, corresponding to 0.5s of sequencing time, are enough to yield predictions more accurate than mapping the finished long reads. The approach could also be used for screening synthetic sequences against biosecurity threats.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Paul F. Zierep et al.. "Towards the prediction of non-peptidic epitopes." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.09.447727. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.09.447727.
In-silico methods for the prediction of epitopes can support and improve workflows for vaccine design, antibody production, and disease therapy. So far, the scope of B cell and T cell epitope prediction has been directed exclusively towards peptidic antigens. Nevertheless, various non-peptidic molecular classes can be recognized by immune cells. These compounds have not been systematically studied yet, and prediction approaches are lacking. The ability to predict the epitope activity of non-peptidic compounds could have vast implications; for example, for immunogenic risk assessment of the vast number of drugs and other xenobiotics. Here we present the first general attempt to predict the epitope activity of non-peptidic compounds using the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) as a source for positive samples. The molecules stored in the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest (ChEBI) database were chosen as background samples. The molecules were clustered into eight homogeneous molecular groups, and classifiers were built for each cluster with the aim of separating the epitopes from the background. Different molecular feature encoding schemes and machine learning models were compared against each other. For those models where a high performance could be achieved based on simple decision rules, the molecular features were then further investigated. Additionally, the findings were used to build a web server that allows for the immunogenic investigation of non-peptidic molecules (http://tools-staging.iedb.org/np_epitope_predictor). The prediction quality was tested with samples from independent evaluation datasets, and the implemented method received noteworthy Receiver Operating Characteristic-Area Under Curve (ROC-AUC) values, ranging from 0.69-0.96 depending on the molecule cluster.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Eguida, Merveille and Didier Rognan. "Unexpected similarity between HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and tumor necrosis factor revealed by binding site image processing." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.06.09.447723. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.06.09.447723.
Rationalizing the identification of hidden similarities across the repertoire of druggable protein cavities remains a major hurdle to a true proteome-wide structure-based discovery of novel drug candidates. We recently described a new computational approach (ProCare), inspired by numerical image processing, to identify local similarities in fragment-based subpockets. During the validation of the method, we unexpectedly identified a possible similarity in the binding pockets of two unrelated targets, human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT). Microscale thermophoresis experiments confirmed the ProCare prediction as two of the three tested and FDA-approved HIV-1 RT inhibitors indeed bind to soluble human TNF-α trimer. Interestingly, the herein disclosed similarity could be revealed neither by state-of-the-art binding sites comparison methods nor by ligand-based pairwise similarity searches, suggesting that the point cloud registration approach implemented in ProCare, is uniquely suited to identify local and unobvious similarities among totally unrelated targets.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.

Gernot Plank et al.. "The openCARP Simulation Environment for Cardiac Electrophysiology." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.03.01.433036. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.03.01.433036.
Background and Objective: Cardiac electrophysiology is a medical specialty with a long and rich tradition of computational modeling. Nevertheless, no community standard for cardiac electrophysiology simulation software has evolved yet. Here, we present the openCARP simulation environment as one solution that could foster the needs of large parts of this community. Methods and Results: openCARP and the Python-based carputils framework allow developing and sharing simulation pipelines which automate in silico experiments including all modeling and simulation steps to increase reproducibility and productivity. The continuously expanding openCARP user community is supported by tailored infrastructure. Documentation and training material facilitate access to this complementary research tool for new users. After a brief historic review, this paper summarizes requirements for a high-usability electrophysiology simulator and describes how openCARP fulfills them. We introduce the openCARP modeling workflow in a multi-scale example of atrial fibrillation simulations on single cell, tissue, organ and body level and finally outline future development potential. Conclusion: As an open simulator, openCARP can advance the computational cardiac electrophysiology field by making state-of-the-art simulations accessible. In combination with the carputils framework, it offers a tailored software solution for the scientific community and contributes towards increasing use, transparency, standardization and reproducibility of in silico experiments.Competing Interest StatementGP, AN, CA and EJV are co-founders of NumeriCor GmbH. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.

Xuyang Liu et al.. "Protein contact map prediction using multiple sequence alignment dropout and consistency learning for sequences with fewer homologs." bioRxiv , no. (2021): 2021.05.12.443740. Accessed June 10, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2021.05.12.443740.
The prediction of protein contact map needs enough normalized number of effective sequence (Nf) in multiple sequence alignment (MSA). When Nf is small, the predicted contact maps are often not satisfactory. To solve this problem, we randomly selected a small part of sequence homologs for proteins with large Nf to generate MSAs with small Nf. From these MSAs, input features were generated and were passed through a consistency learning network, aiming to get the same results when using the features generated from the MSA with large Nf. The results showed that this method effectively improves the prediction accuracy of protein contact maps with small Nf.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.
